

=== PAGE 1 ===
Modelling a Partially Liquid-Filled Particle Damper using Coupled Lagrangian Methods
P. Eberhard and C. Gnanasambandham
VI International Conference on Particle-based Methods – Fundamentals and Applications
PARTICLES 2019
E. Oñate, M. Bischoff, D.R.J. Owen, P. Wriggers & T. Zohdi (Eds)
MODELLING A PARTIALLY LIQUID-FILLED PARTICLE
DAMPER USING COUPLED LAGRANGIAN METHODS
Chandramouli Gnanasambandham and Peter Eberhard
Institute of Engineering and Computational Mechanics,
Pfaffenwaldring 9, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
chandramouli.gnanasambandham, peter.eberhard@itm.uni-stuttgart.de
www.itm.uni-stuttgart.de
Key words:
Partially Liquid-Filled Particle Damper, Complex Particle Shapes, 3D
Printed Particles, Coupled SPH-DEM Method
Abstract.
Energy dissipation in particle dampers (PDs) is complex and occurs mainly
due to the relative motion between particles and to their surroundings. The degree of
relative motion is particularly sensitive to changes in the external vibration amplitudes.
Low vibration amplitudes lower the relative motion between solid particles, and thus lead
to significantly lower energy dissipation rates. In order to influence the degree of relative
motion between solid particles, a method is investigated in which the PD is filled with
a combination of solid and liquid fillings. Moreover, with the PD partially filled with
a liquid, the solid particle shape plays a more profound role in enhancing the damping
performance. In order to investigate the effects of complex particle shapes and an added
liquid, a simulation model based on Lagrangian methods is presented in this work. In order
to validate the simulation models, experiments were also carried out. The experimental
setup consists of a PD mounted on a vertical leaf spring. The PD is a cylindrical container
filled with complex shaped particles in combination with a liquid. The complex shapes,
here chosen to be tetrapods, were manufactured using a Stereolithography 3D printer.
A good agreement between simulations and experiments is observed. In order to gain a
deeper insight, a numerical study is presented which investigates the effects of solid-liquid
ratio on the dissipated kinetic energy.
1
INTRODUCTION
Particle dampers (PDs) are becoming a popular alternative to conventional dampers
due to their relatively simple design and their flexible ability to dissipate energy over
wide excitation frequencies [1].
A detailed review on PDs can be found in [2].
One
of the main drawbacks of a conventional PD is, that it is highly sensitive to a change
in vibration amplitudes. Especially, their damping performance reduces by a substantial
amount under low forcing conditions [3]. One particularly promising idea to overcome such
shortcomings is to partially fill the conventional PD with a liquid [4, 5]. The added liquid
sloshes along with the solid particles which act as dynamic barriers, in turn dissipating
744


=== PAGE 2 ===
Chandramouli Gnanasambandham and Peter Eberhard
significant amounts of kinetic energy. This dissipative effect due to liquid sloshing through
barriers can be further enhanced by replacing the conventional spherical shapes, which
were used in [4], with complex shapes, in this work tetrapod shapes. The tetrapod shape
has been popularly used in coastal engineering applications as wave breaker to dissipate
energy carried by powerful waves and thereby reducing coastal erosion [6].
In order to gain deeper insights into the influence of various parameters on the dis-
sipated energy, a model of the partially liquid-filled PD based on Lagrangian methods
is investigated. The solid particle interactions involving non-convex particle shapes are
modelled using the Discrete Element Method (DEM). The fluid motion is modelled using
the Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) method. A coupled SPH-DEM approach
according to [7] is used to model fluid-solid interactions. The focus of this paper lies in
showing that fully resolved coupled SPH-DEM simulations can be used to reliably predict
solid particle shape effects on the dissipated energy in partially liquid-filled PDs.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 a short description of the experimental
setup is given. In Section 3 details about the simulation model are outlined. Then, in
Section 4 simulation results are compared against experiments. Section 5 showcases a
numerical study to investigate the effect of solid-liquid fill ratio on the PD performance.
Finally, in Section 6 some concluding remarks are provided.
2
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In order to better understand the simulation results and to build confidence in the
simulation model, hardware experiments were conducted. The experimental apparatus,
which is identical to the one used in [4, 5] except for the filling, consists of a vertically
mounted steel leaf-spring (480 mm × 30 mm × 3 mm) on top of which a particle damper
is rigidly mounted. The PD is a transparent acrylic cylindrical container of a fixed inner
diameter of 44 mm and an adjustable length of L. Using an electromagnet, the vertical
leaf-spring with the PD mounted on it’s top is given an initial displacement, released
from rest and allowed to oscillate freely in its fundamental mode. A PSV500 Polytec
Laser Doppler Vibrometer is used to measure the displacement and velocity of the PD
container. Depending on various PD parameters such as solid-liquid fill ratio, solid particle
shape, amount of liquid among others, different damping performance is achieved.
The solid particles used in the experiments were manufactured on a Formlabs Form 2.0
Stereolithography (SLA) 3D printer, using a resolution of 100 µm and a Photopolymer
resin (“Black Resin”, Formlabs Inc.). In order to prevent wrapping of the solid particles,
extra support structures are automatically added during the printing process. After the
printing, the printed parts go through a 3-step finishing process. First, the parts are
removed from the 3D-printer platform. The removed parts are then washed in Isopropyl
alcohol in order to dissolve any leftover liquid resin. Finally, the support structures are
removed to obtain the solid particles. An overview illustrating the 3D-printing procedure
is shown in Figure 1.
745


=== PAGE 3 ===
Chandramouli Gnanasambandham and Peter Eberhard
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 1: Non-convex polyhedron shapes manufactured using a 3D-printer. a) Formlabs Form 2.0 SLA
3D-printer. b) Multiple particles after 3D printing. A single tetrapod shaped particle c) before and d)
after removing the support structure.
3
SIMULATION MODEL
3.1
Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics
The Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations (RANS) are used to describe the fluid
motion. The conservation of mass of the fluid with the Reynolds averaged velocity ¯v is
given by
dρ
dt = −ρ∇· ¯v
(1)
and the conservation of linear momentum is given by
ρ
d¯v
dt

= −∇¯p + µ∇2¯v −∇R + f
(2)
with density ρ, viscosity µ, Reynolds turbulence stresses R and external body forces f.
Here ¯p is the Reynolds-averaged pressure. In this work, the weakly compressible Smoothed
Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) method is used to discretize the RANS equations accord-
ing to [8]. In essence, the first two terms in Eq. 2, namely the pressure term ∇¯p and the
viscosity term µ∇2¯v, are computed as proposed in [9]. An artificial stress term accord-
ing to [10] and an artificial viscosity term as proposed in [11] are introduced in Eq. 2 to
reduce the tensile instability and to smooth spurious numerical oscillations, respectively.
In addition to this, a diffusive term is introduced in Eq. 1 to obtain smoother density
fields according to [12]. Since the PD is only partially filled with a liquid, violent sloshing
and large free surface deformations are expected. Therefore, an adequate modelling of
turbulence is essential. In this work, the popular k-ε turbulence model according to [8] is
used. Concerning the interaction between liquid and PD container, a penalty approach
similar to the one described in [13] is used.
746


=== PAGE 4 ===
Chandramouli Gnanasambandham and Peter Eberhard
3.2
Discrete Element Method
The contacts between solid particles and PD container is modelled using the Discrete
Element Method (DEM). The equations of motion of a single solid particle i is given by
the Newton-Euler equations [14]
Mi
dVi
dt = Fi,
(3)
Ii
dΩi
dt + Ωi × IiΩi = Li.
(4)
In these equations, Ii is the inertia tensor, Mi is the mass, and Fi and Li are the external
forces and torques acting on the particle i. The external force Fi acting on a solid particle
contains forces due to gravity and due to contact between other solid particles and the
PD container. Traditionally, the DEM approach was conceptualized for simple spherical
particles [15]. Since the solid particles used in this work have complicated geometry, as
seen in Figure 1, the traditional approach should be extended to accommodate contacts
between arbitrary shapes. There are different approaches to compute the forces Fi and
torques Li for complicated shapes. One approach, as suggested in [16], is to represent
a rigid particle of arbitrary shape by a set of spherical particles whose relative positions
remain unchanged. In a more sophisticated approach, the particles of arbitrary shapes
can be represented using triangular meshes and the contact forces could be computed
proportional to the overlap volume between two such meshes. Moreover, by using fast
collision detection algorithms such as the Bounding Volume Hierarchy approach [17], the
simulation time can be reduced drastically. In this work, this sort of an approach is used
to model contacts between non-convex shapes, which is readily available in the particle
simulation software package Pasimodo [18].
3.3
SPH-DEM Coupling
In this paper, these hydraulic forces, which are exchanged between SPH and DEM
particles, are described using an approach as in [7]. In this approach a set of virtual
SPH particles are placed uniformly around the boundary of the DEM particle. These
virtual SPH particles are basically meant to mimic the interface atoms between SPH and
DEM particle in a macroscopic scale. This approach has been applied to fluid-structure
interaction problems recently in [19, 20, 21]. Moreover, this approach was also used in
the partially liquid-filled PD context involving spherical shaped solids in [4].
For time integration the explicit second-order Leapfrog scheme with time step control
is used for all the simulations. Moreover, all the simulations are set up and performed
using the particle simulation software package Pasimodo [18], which has been developed
at the ITM for over a decade.
4
MODEL VALIDATION
In this section the coupled SPH-DEM model is validated against experimental data,
which is generated using the ring-down experimental setup introduced in Section 2. The
747


=== PAGE 5 ===
Chandramouli Gnanasambandham and Peter Eberhard
vertical leaf spring, which is used in the experiments, is modelled as a simple single degree
of freedom spring-mass-damper system with the system parameters as identified in [4].
All the experiments and simulations presented in this section are conducted for an
acrylic PD container of length L = 100 mm and inner diameter of 44 mm. In both cases,
the PD container is loaded with 60 tetrapod shaped particles and 30 ml of distilled water.
For the experiments each tetrapod particle is manufactured using a 3D printer, as seen
in Figure 1. Moreover, each tetrapod has a bounding box dimension of d =8 mm and a
density of ρp = 1200 kgm−3. On the simulation side the same geometry STL file, which
was given as input to the 3D printer, is loaded in Pasimodo to represent the non-convex
shape during all the simulations. The most relevant model parameters identified are listed
in Table 1.
Table 1: Relevant parameters for the simulations
parameter
value
no. of solid particles np
60
solid density ρp (kgm−3)
1200
liquid density ρliq (kgm−3)
1000
liquid viscosity ν (Pa.s)
8.9 × 10−4
CFL number
0.7
SPH smoothing length h (m)
7.5 × 10−4
In Figure 2 (left), the velocity of the partially liquid-filled PD with tetrapod shapes,
measured during experiments and predicted by coupled SPH-DEM simulation is com-
pared. Figure 3 visualizes the motion of the damper contents as predicted by coupled
SPH-DEM simulations. In order to better understand the effect of solid particles, the
velocity damper filled purely with a liquid measured during experiments is also plotted
in Figure 2 (left). Macroscopically seen, there is a good agreement between simulations
and experiments, showing that coupled SPH-DEM simulations can adequately model the
dynamics involved in a partially liquid-filled particle damper. It can be clearly seen, that
the velocity decay is faster for the case with both liquid and solid filling, than for the
purely liquid filled case. There are two possible reasons for this. First, the solid particles
due to the hydraulic forces applied by the liquid, remain agile even under lower vibration
amplitude, thereby leading to more effective collisions and in turn more energy dissipa-
tion. Secondly, the liquid is squeezed between two approaching solid particles leading
to shearing of liquid layers. This ultimately results in more energy dissipation. In this
case, the non-convex tetrapod particles behave effectively as obstacles to waves created
by liquid motion. So in essence, the energy dissipation in case of a liquid-filled PD is due
to the combined effect of increased solid particle agility and the sloshing motion of the
liquid.
748


=== PAGE 6 ===
Chandramouli Gnanasambandham and Peter Eberhard
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
time [s]
velocity [m/s]
liq+tet exp
pure liq exp
liq+tet sim
PD with liquid+tetrapod
filling
Figure 2: (left) The velocity of the damper container is compared for all the damper configurations.
The red dashed line represents the container velocity predicted by coupled SPH-DEM simulations. The
simulation and experiment are in good agreement. (right) The PD with liquid and tetrapod filling used
in the experiments.
t= 0.27 s
t= 0.55 s
Figure 3: The motion of the damper contents, predicted by coupled SPH-DEM simulation, is visualized
at two different time instances. The waves created by liquid motion are broken by the presence of agile
solid particles. The fluid is visualized as colored balls, where the color gradient visualizes pressure from
low (red) to high (blue).
5
INFLUENCE OF SOLID-LIQUID FILL RATIO
In the previous section it was seen that a combination of complex shaped solids and a
liquid can substantially increase the dissipation performance. This newly gained insight
rises a new question regarding the dynamics involved in partially liquid-filled PDs. What
should the solid-liquid fill ratio be in order to maximize the dissipation rate? In order to
gain further insights regarding this question a numerical investigation is performed.
In this numerical study the number of tetrapod solids are varied in three stages (0, 40,
60 solids) while the amount of liquid is kept at a constant 30 ml. By this way, the solid-
liquid ratio is implicitly varied. For this study, the density of each solid tetrapod particle
is chosen to be 7850 kgm−3. While setting up the simulations, compensation masses were
added to the system mass so that all the configurations have the same static mass. All
the other parameters are carried over from Section 4 including the initial deflection of the
spring which is 10 mm.
749


=== PAGE 7 ===
Chandramouli Gnanasambandham and Peter Eberhard
In Figure 4 (left) the simulated velocity decay for different solid-liquid fill ratios is
compared and the corresponding average logarithmic decay rate is visualized in Figure
4 (right). It can be seen, that the decay rate for a damper filled purely with a liquid
is lower than the PD with both solids and liquid. Moreover, increasing the number of
solids particles seem to substantially increase the decay rate. This effect can be better
understood using Figure 5 where the motion of the PD contents is visualized as predicted
by coupled SPH-DEM simulations. Increasing the number of solid particles in the presence
of a liquid effectively increases the number of solid particle collisions. Additionally, the
liquid flow is observed to be more fierce with increase in the number of solid particles,
leading to even more kinetic energy dissipation. With this investigation it can be said,
that coupled SPH-DEM simulations can indeed be utilized to reliably predict complex
dynamical effects present in partially liquid-filled PDs.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
time [s]
velocity [m/s]
40 tet+liq
purely liq
60 tet+liq
purely
liquid filling
40 tetrapods
+ liquid
60 tetrapods
+ liquid
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
logarithmic decay rate
Figure 4: (left) The velocity of the damper container for various solid-liquid fill ratios is compared.
(right) The average logarithmic decay rate, computed at the end of every cycle, is visualized with respect
to different solid-liquid fill ratios.
6
CONCLUSIONS
In this work, it is shown that coupled SPH-DEM simulations can adequately predict
the effect of complex particle shapes in enhancing dissipation performance of partially
liquid-filled particle dampers. The tetrapod shape, inspired from coastal engineering, is
the chosen particle shape for this investigation. In order to gain deeper insight into the
various dissipation mechanisms and to increase confidence in the numerical models, ex-
periments were performed. The experimental test bench is identical to the one used in
[4] except that the solid particles were manufactured using a Stereolithography (SLA) 3D
printer and have a different particle shape. A good agreement between experiments and
simulations is observed on a macroscopic level. Both in simulations and experiments the
partially liquid-filled PDs with non-convex particle shapes has superior damping perfor-
mance than a purely liquid filled damper. The reasoning for this effect is twofold. Firstly,
750


=== PAGE 8 ===
Chandramouli Gnanasambandham and Peter Eberhard
t= 0.27 s
t= 0.55 s
purely liquid-filling
40 tetrapod solids + liquid filling
60 tetrapod solids + liquid filling
Figure 5: The motion of damper contents visualized for (top row) purely liquid filled damper, (middle
row) 40 tetrapod solids + liquid and (bottom row) 60 tetrapod solids + liquid, at two different time
instances. In all cases, the fluid is visualized as colored balls, where the color gradient visualizes pressure
from low (red) to high (blue).
due to the presence of a liquid the complex shaped solid particles remain agile even under
low vibration amplitude, leading to more effective collisions and in turn higher energy
dissipation.
Secondly, the liquid sloshing in the presence of complex shaped particles
leads to more shearing between liquid layers causing more energy dissipation. In order to
test these insights, a numerical study to understand the effect of fluid-solid fill ratio was
set up. In this study, the solid-liquid fill ratio was varied by keeping the amount of liquid
constant and varying the number of solid tetrapod particles. Adding more solids particles
seemed to increase the dissipation rate. Since the solid particles carry more momentum
than a liquid, the collisions between adjacent solids is much more effective leading to
higher kinetic energy dissipation.
751


=== PAGE 9 ===
Chandramouli Gnanasambandham and Peter Eberhard
7
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research has received funding from the German Research Foundation (DFG)
within the priority program SPP 1897 “Calm, Smooth and Smart: Neuartige Schwingungs-
beeinflussung durch gezielt eingesetzte Dissipation” subproject EB195/25-1 “Partikeldämpfer
- Schwin-gungsbeeinflussung durch verteilte Dissipation über komplexe Partikelformen”.
This support is highly appreciated.
REFERENCES
[1]
Panossian, H.: Structural Damping Enhancement via Non-Obstructive Particle
Damping Technique. Journal of Vibration and Acoustics, Vol. 114, pp. 101–105,
1992.
[2]
Lu, Z.; Wang, Z.; Masri, S.F.; Lu, X.: Particle Impact Dampers: Past, Present,
and Future. Structural Control and Health Monitoring, Vol. 25, pp. 1–25, 2017.
[3]
Kollmer, J.E.; Sack, A.; Heckel, M.; Pöschel, T.: Relaxation of a Spring with an
Attached Granular Damper. New Journal of Physics, Vol. 15, p. 093023, 2013.
[4]
Gnanasambandham, C.; Schönle, A.; Eberhard, P.: Investigating the dissipative
effects of liquid-filled particle dampers using coupled DEM–SPH methods. Com-
putational Particle Mechanics, Vol. 6, pp. 257–269, 2019.
[5]
Gnanasambandham, C.; Merten, S.; Hoffmann, N.; Eberhard, P.: Multi-Scale Dy-
namics of Particle Dampers using Wavelets: Extracting Particle Activity Metrics
from Ring Down Experiments. Journal of Sound and Vibration, Vol. 454, pp. 1–13,
2019.
[6]
Goda, Y.; Kishara, Y.; Kamiyama, Y.: Laboratory Investigation on the Over-
topping Rate of Seawalls by Irregular Waves. Report of the Port and Harbour
Research Institute, Vol. 14, No. 4, 1975.
[7]
Canelas, R.B.; Domínguez, J.M.; Crespo, A.J.; Gómez-Gesteira, M.; Ferreira,
R.M.: A Smooth Particle Hydrodynamics Discretization for the Modelling of Free
Surface Flows and Rigid Body Dynamics.
International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Fluids, Vol. 78, No. 9, pp. 581–593, 2015.
[8]
Violeau, D.; Issa, R.: Numerical Modelling of Complex Turbulent Free-Surface
Flows with the SPH Method: an Overview. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Fluids, Vol. 53, pp. 277–304, 2007.
[9]
Morris, J.P.; Fox, P.J.; Zhu, Y.: Modeling Low Reynolds Number Incompressible
Flows Using SPH. Journal of Computational Physics, Vol. 136, No. 1, pp. 214–226,
1997.
[10]
Monaghan, J.J.: SPH without a Tensile Instability.
Journal of Computational
Physics, Vol. 159, No. 2, pp. 290–311, 2000.
752


=== PAGE 10 ===
Chandramouli Gnanasambandham and Peter Eberhard
[11]
Monaghan, J.J.:
Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics.
Reports on Progress in
Physics, Vol. 68, No. 8, pp. 1703–1759, 2005.
[12]
Molteni, D.; Colagrossi, A.: A Simple Procedure to Improve the Pressure Evalu-
ation in Hydrodynamic Context Using the SPH. Computer Physics Communica-
tions, Vol. 180, No. 6, pp. 861–872, 2009.
[13]
Mueller, M.; Schirm, S.; Teschner, M.; Heidelberger, B.; Gross, M.: Interaction of
Fluids with Deformable Solids. Computer Animation and Virtual Worlds, Vol. 15,
No. 3–4, pp. 159–171, 2004.
[14]
Schiehlen, W.; Eberhard, P.: Applied Dynamics. Heidelberg: Springer, 2014.
[15]
Cundall, P.A.: Formulation of a Three-dimensional Distinct Element Model – Part
I. A Scheme to Detect and Represent Contacts in a System Composed of Many
Polyhedral Blocks. International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences
& Geomechanics Abstracts, Vol. 25, No. 3, pp. 107–116, 1988.
[16]
Cabiscol, R.; Finke, J.H.; Kwade, A.: Calibration and Interpretation of DEM
Parameters for Simulations of Cylindrical Tablets with Multi-Sphere Approach.
Powder Technology, Vol. 327, pp. 232–245, 2018.
[17]
Ericson, C.: Real-time collision detection. New York: CRC Press, 2004.
[18]
Pasimodo - Particle Simulations Software.
www.itm.uni-stuttgart.de/soft-
ware/pasimodo/index.html (last accessed on July 8, 2019).
[19]
Canelas, R.B.; Domínguez, J.; Crespo, A.; Gómez-Gesteira, M.; Ferreira, R.: Re-
solved Simulation of a Granular-Fluid Flow with a Coupled SPH-DCDEM Model.
Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, Vol. 143, pp. 1 – 6, 2017.
[20]
Schnabel, D.; Özkaya, E.; Biermann, D.; Eberhard, P.: Transient Simulation of
Cooling-Lubricant Flow for Deep-Hole Drilling-Processes. Procedia CIRP, Vol. 77,
pp. 78–81, 2018.
[21]
Altomare, C.; Crespo, A.J.; Rogers, B.; Dominguez, J.; Gironella, X.; Gómez-
Gesteira, M.:
Numerical Modelling of Armour Block Sea Breakwater with
Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics. Computers & Structures, Vol. 130, pp. 34–45,
2014.
753
